TPC_edits.introduction.md (#93)
jessegmeyerlab/proteomics-tutorial: content/02.introduction.md

## Introduction {.page_break_before}

Proteomics is the large-scale study of protein structure and function. 
Proteins are translated from messenger RNA (mRNA) transcripts that are transcribed from the genome. 
Although the genome encodes potential cellular functions and states, the study of proteins in all their forms is necessary to truly understand biology. 

Currently, proteomics can be performed with various methods. 
Mass spectrometry has emerged within the past few decades as the premier tool for comprehensive proteome analysis.

> The ability of mass spectrometry (MS) to detect any chemical moiety conferring a mass shift, enables the identification of peptide sequences and modifications for diverse biological investigations.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The ability of mass spectrometry (MS) to detect charged chemicals enables the identification of peptide sequences and modifications for diverse biological investigations.
```

Another major milestone that allowed identification of over 1,000 proteins were improvements to chromatography upstream of MS anlaysis [@DOI:10.1021/ac010617e]. 
As the volume of data exploded, methods for statistical analysis transitioned from the wild west of ad hoc empirical analysis to modern informatics based on statistical models [@DOI:10.1021/ac0341261] and false discovery rate [@DOI:10.1038/nmeth1019]. 
<!-- Todo: figure 1: major milestones in proteomics technology since 1990 -->

Two strategies of mass spectrometry-based proteomics differ fundamentally by whether proteins are cleaved into peptides before analysis: "top-down" and "bottom-up". 
Bottom-up proteomics (also refered to as shotgun proteomics) is defined by the intentional hydrolysis of proteins into peptide pieces using enzymes called proteases [@DOI:10.1038/nature19949]. 
Therefore, bottom-up proteomics does not actually measure proteins, but must infer protein presence and abundance from identified peptides [@DOI:10.1021/ac0341261]. 
Sometimes, proteins are inferred from only one peptide sequence representing a small fraction of the total protein sequence predicted from the genome. 

> In contrast, top-down proteomics attempts to measure intact proteins [@DOI: https://doi.org/10.1021/ja973655h; @DOI:https://doi.org/10.1038/nmeth.2369; @DOI:https://pubs.acs.org/doi/pdf/10.1021/ac0415657; @DOI:10.1039/C9MO00154A]. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In contrast, top-down proteomics attempts to measure intact proteins [@DOI:10.1021/ja973655h; @DOI:10.1038/nmeth.2369; @DOI:10.1021/ac0415657; @DOI:10.1039/C9MO00154A]. 
```

> The potential benefit of top-down proteomics is the ability to measure proteoforms [@DOI:https://doi.org/10.1038/nmeth.2369; @DOI:10.1126/science.aat1884; @DOI:https://doi.org/10.1038/nchembio.2576]. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The potential benefit of top-down proteomics is the ability to measure proteoforms [@DOI:10.1038/nmeth.2369; @DOI:10.1126/science.aat1884; @DOI:10.1038/nchembio.2576]. 
```

> However, due to myriad analytical challenges, the depth of protein coverage that is achievable by top-down proteomics is generally less than that of bottom-up proteomics [@DOI:10.1021/acs.analchem.7b04747; @DOI:https://doi.org/10.1038/s41587-023-01714-x]. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, due to myriad analytical challenges, the depth of protein coverage that is achievable by top-down proteomics is generally less than that of bottom-up proteomics [@DOI:10.1021/acs.analchem.7b04747]. 
```

In this tutorial we focus on the bottom-up proteomics workflow. 
The most common version of this workflow is generally comprised of the following steps. 
First, proteins in a biological sample must be extracted. 
Usually this is achieved by mechanically lysing cells or tissue while denaturing and solubilizing the proteins and disrupting DNA to minimize interference in analysis procedures. 
Next, proteins are hydrolyzed into peptides, most often using the protease trypsin, which generates peptides with basic C-terminal amino acids (arginine and lysine) to aid in fragment ion series production during tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS). 

> Peptides from proteome hydrolysis must be purified; most often this is accomplished with reverse-phase liquid chromatography (RPLC) cartridges or tips. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Peptides from proteome hydrolysis must be purified; most often this is accomplished with reversed-phase liquid chromatography (RPLC) cartridges or tips. 
```

The peptides are then almost always separated by LC before they are ionized and introduced into a mass spectrometer, although recent reports also describe LC-free proteomics by direct infusion [@DOI:10.1038/s41592-020-00999-z; @DOI:10.1021/acs.analchem.2c02249; @DOI:10.1101/2023.06.26.546628]. 
The mass spectrometer then collects precursor and fragment ion data from those peptides. 
Data analysis is usually the rate limiting step.
Peptides must be identified from the tandem mass spectra, protein groups are inferred from a proteome database, and then quantitative values are assigned. 
Changes in proteins across conditions are determined with statistical tests, and results must be interpreted in the context of the relevant biology.

There are many variations to this workflow. 
The diversity of experimental goals that are achievable with proteomics technology drives a wide variety of workflows. 

> Every choice is important, from instrument procurement to choice of data processing software and everything in between. Each choice affects the results. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Every choice is important, from instrument procurement to choice of data processing software and everything in between. 
Each choice affects the results. 
```
